docs: document how to check health based on logs (#607)
canonical/pebble: docs/how-to/check-health-based-on-logs.md

# How to check health based on logs

Pebble stores the most recent `stdout` and `stderr` from each service. This guide demonstrates how to set up a check that fails if the logs contain a particular line, such as a warning message.

This method is an alternative to directly querying a service. Directly querying a service is typically a more reliable method of catching issues. For more information, see [](./run-services-reliably).

## Define a layer

We'll define service called `foo` and a check called `foo-warning` that inspects the logs from `foo`:

```yaml
services:
  foo:
    override: replace
    command: /bin/foo
    startup: enabled

> checks:

Reviewer: Nit: I would typically put a blank line before `checks:` -- slightly more readable.

Author: Done, thanks!

# How to check health based on logs

Pebble stores the most recent `stdout` and `stderr` from each service. This guide demonstrates how to set up a health check that fails if the logs contain a particular line, such as a warning message.

> This is an indirect and potentially unreliable way to catch issues with services. Whenever possible, you should set up health checks that query the service status directly. For more information, see [](./run-services-reliably).

Reviewer 2: Could be more positive:

```suggestion
This method provides an alternative way to detect issues, though direct health checks are preferred. Whenever possible, you should set up health checks that query the service status directly. For more information, see [](./run-services-reliably).
```

## Define a layer

We'll define service called `foo` and a check called `foo-warning` that inspects the logs from `foo`:

```yaml
services:
  foo:
    override: replace
    command: /bin/foo
    startup: enabled
checks:
  foo-warning:
    override: replace
    threshold: 1
    exec:
      command: bash -c '! pebble logs | grep -q "\\[foo\\] .*WARNING"'
      # Because of YAML escaping rules, we need to use \\[ to pass \[ to grep.
```

> The check searches Pebble's service logs for lines such as:

Reviewer 2: More precise:

```suggestion
The check searches Pebble's service logs for lines matching the pattern, such as:
```

```text
2025-04-26T03:22:20.315Z [foo] some WARNING reported by the service
```

If a match is found, the `bash -c '...'` command exits with 1 and the check fails.

When the check fails, Pebble doesn't restart `foo`. If `foo` were to restart, the check would still be considered "down" (because the logs would still contain the warning message) and Pebble wouldn't restart `foo` again if another warning occurred.

> It's possible to [configure a service to restart when a check fails](#restart-a-service-when-the-health-check-fails). However, we don't recommend that you configure `foo` to restart. Instead, we recommend that you monitor the check and alert a human operator if the check fails.

Reviewer 2: The above two paragraphs don't feel very logical to me. I tried to rewrite this part. My logic is:

You can configure "restart on check failure" -> but it's not enabled by defaut -> However, in this case, it doesn't help because of X -> It's better to Y.

Following this logic:

```suggestion
By default, Pebble keeps a service running without restarting it even if a health check fails. Although we can configure a service to restart on check failure, this approach isn't helpful here, because even if `foo` restarts, the check remains "down" (since the warning message persists in the logs and restarting won't resolve the logged warning), and subsequent failures wouldn't trigger additional restarts. So, in this particular case, monitor the check and alert a human operator to investigate.
```

Author: Thanks, I found this awkward to explain. I'm using your suggestion to improve it

## Get the status of the check

To display the status of the check:

```{terminal}
   :input: pebble health foo-warning
unhealthy
```

This command exits with 0 if the check is healthy, or 1 if the check is unhealthy.

To display detailed status information about the check:

```{terminal}
   :input: pebble check foo-warning
name: foo-warning
startup: enabled
status: down
failures: 3
threshold: 1
change-id: "60"
logs: |
    2025-04-26T11:22:27+08:00 ERROR exit status 1
    2025-04-26T11:22:37+08:00 ERROR exit status 1
```

## See more

> - [`pebble logs`](#reference_pebble_logs_command) command

Reviewer 2: I don't see a logical order here because one might use any of these three commands as a first debugging step. Maybe use alphanumeric order?
